**2023 Annual General Meeting of the Lac Notre Dame and Usher
Lake Association**

**Agenda**

Annual General Meeting - August 26, 2023, 16:00 at Camp Kalalla

**Mandate of the association:**

To promote, protect and preserve the quality of Lac Notre Dame and
Usher Lake and the watershed environment of the Lakes to ensure their
continued use and enjoyment by all

**Constitution of the meeting** - quorum based on registered members

Lisa Fast, president, opened the meeting.

By the time of the meeting, 48 members had paid their membership fees.
21 members attended the meeting.  Quorum requires at least
25% of members be present - so quorum was reached. Bylaws require that
only members who've paid the $10 fee can vote.

Move to open the meeting by: Lisa Fast

Seconded by: Marie Maisonneuve

**Approval of previous year\rquote s minutes**

2022 Minutes approved - posted online

Moved by: Don Herweyer

Seconded by: Marie Maisonneuve

**Approve agenda for 2023 meeting**

\\* Financial report

\\* Water Testing and water levels report

\\* Board report on 2022-23

\\* Develop and vote on proposed program for 2023 -2024 including
boating/weed cutting team

\\* Members Open Issues and questions

\\* Current board and election of new board members

Moved by: Lisa Fast

Seconded by: Marie Maisonneuve

**Financial Report**

Presented by Brian Cook, treasurer for the <u>fiscal year 2022 -
2023</u>

Summary:

\\* The Lake Association has accounts with Desjardins and at June 30,
2023 the chequing account balance was $747 and the savings account was
$3,200

\\* Membership fees brought in $440 of and donations $845 for a total
income of $1285

\\* Our usual expenses included $470 for water testing in Lac Notre Dame
and in Usher, $425 for purchase of buoys, anchors and ropes to mark
heavy milfoil areas by Brian Cook, and $78 for Entreprise Quebec annual
registration.

\\* A one-time purchase of signs for the milfoil buoys, with the lake
association web address, totalled $1,800. We will collect the signs in
the fall and put them out again in late spring. There are extras too, so
we expect them to last many years.

Your membership fees support the following budget for the upcoming year

\\* Water testing approximately $600 per year

\\* Buoys and anchors $500 in July due to extensive milfoil and
replacements of lost/aging buoys, expect $400 more in spring

\\* Reserve funds to prepare for potential invasive species or milfoil
surge; consultation with experts like ABV-7,

\\* Quebec non-profit corporation fees ($35/year)

\\* Domain name and hosting fees for the web site ($30 every second year)

\\* Facility rental for annual meeting: $100

\\* Good news - the Association received over $1,400 in donations this
summer (2023) which will go towards this budget Move to accept

Treasurer\rquote s report Moved: Lisa Fast

Seconded by: Graeme Simpson

**Water testing report**

Presented by Lisa Fast

<u>Lac Notre Dame, August 16 2023 Summary</u>

Thank you to Carole Dore and Rejean Vaillant for their continued
volunteer work on water testing.

<u>E-coli</u>

E-coli levels are generally low, with 6 of 8 locations almost
undetectable.

Exceptions are:

Location 4, between Generations and Symons (Criminal Creek) very high at
230 CFU/100ml - swimming is not recommended above 200 CFU, drinking
water should have 0.

Location 6 at Generations was also higher than the rest of the lake at
66.

-   Water may be impacted by pond water and/or impact of otters:
    evidence of their use of lake where creek comes out

-   Construction may also be issue

Lisa to report the e-coli levels to the municipality given the recurrent
e-coli results near locations 4 and 6 over the years.

**Question from the floor**

Do we send out flyer/ advise people?

**Action**: will test twice in July 2024: e-coli only

<u>Phosphorous and Nitrogen and Water Clarity</u>

Phosphorus is back down to quite low levels, and nitrogen levels are

within the usual range.

Water clarity amidst the heavy August rains was lower than usual.

<u>Usher Lake August 16th, 2023</u>

E-coli levels in Usher Lake range from 10 to 26, which is better than
many previous years.

High levels of phosphates are seen at both inlets, which may increase
the risk of blue-green algae.

Recommendation: Usher Lake property owners should watch for and report
any possible Blue-Green slicks (floats and looks like paint on the water
surface)

<u>General</u>

\\* Added dissolved organic compounds to water testing this year. Added
additional cost. Results have not been received.

Next year plan to test a week earlier

**Water level report**

\\* Water levels were unusually low May through July because no beavers
had yet dammed the outlet. This contributed to greater milfoil growth.
Beavers then began damming in late July and with constant rain, levels
rose to slightly higher than usual August levels. This helps keep the
weediest parts of the lake navigable and reduces sunlight to weeds.

\\* Imre and the dam volunteers Marcel, Denis) have been carefully
removing parts of the dam on an almost weekly basis. They manage removal
carefully as there is a wetland and road that must be protected behind
the dam, and extensive regulations to follow.

\\* no cost

\\* thanks to dam team

**Board report on program that had been planned for 2022-2023**

\\* Buoys: We purchased additional anchors, rope and buoys, and placed
them with Jason Gunville. Buoys were added later at the west Island
channel and bay at the Du Domaine causeway. They were moved as the weed
mats grew.

\\* Signs: We purchased signs warning to stay away from the buoys. The
design is based on La Peche designs. We placed them on roads, docks, on
the island and at the weediest points in the lake. The signs will be
removed in the fall and re-used. Similar to for sale signs: draws people
closer to read. Some resistance to signs: removed from road side e.g at
Notre Dame and de la Manoir.

<u>Recommendation</u>: Suggested signs were too small. Should make font
be larger

<u>Milfoil</u>

We investigated the status of the cutter purchased back in 2004, and
attempted to arrange a cutting morning in mid-August. Weather didn't
cooperate.

A few letters were delivered to property owners boating through the
weed-choked island channel.

Problem with someone cutting weeds without raking, and so many floated
in <u>Recommended action:</u> drop a hand-out next summer - have someone
in each area walk them around. Bernard and Susan on Shaw volunteered to
do that for their area

In-person board meeting: Rupert Community Centre wasn't available this
year, so trying here at Camp Kalalla. Cost $100. Let us know your
thoughts.

Move to accept the board and water testing report: Don Herweyer

Seconded: Dave Hayward

**Proposed Association program for 2023-2024**

\\* Develop a boating team/committee for boater education and milfoil
cutting

\\* Usual buoys, water testing, dam management etc.

\\* Member recruitment: use MRC assessment to determine who owns each
property and identify missing members, add emails to list sorted by
streets. Approximately 150 properties and 48 members.

Is there a limit of number of owners for size of lake?

John:

\\* apply for municipal grant for buoys

Moved by: Lisa Fast

Seconded by: John

Members open issues

\\*Rob Farley retiring from Camp Kalalla \endash  looking for replacement

Proposed coordinate Weed cutting: Marie and Gaston, Graeme.

Mary Lee: more weeds impacting use and enjoyment.

Proposed cutting strategy: plan to do a different section each year.
What section is the priority?

Bob Scott provided back ground on how to organize successful weed
cutting with cutter and barge. Minimum 10 people. Contact Bob Scott, Rob
Gilchrest or Rob Farley for more information.

For barge, consider rental.

Recommend requesting donation for weeds.

Move: Jane Hayward

Seconded: Laureen Osmond

Current board and election of new members

The Board meets 3-4x times per year plus the AGM.

\\* Jane Hayward - Secretary

\\* Bryan Watkinson, member (Usher Lake) has resigned - seeking a new
Usher Lake rep\\*\\*

\\* Don Herweyer, member.

\\* Brian Cook, treasurer.

\\* Lisa Fast, President (elected July 2018)

\\* Marie Maisonneuve, member

\\* Graeme Simpson - member

Move to adjourn

Moved by Lisa Fast

Seconded by Don Herweyer
